# Highlights from Nick Land's Crypto Current

Sporadic and truncated highlights from [Crypto-Current: Bitcoin and Philosophy](https://etscrivner.github.io/cryptocurrent/).

---

§0.32 - ... It is no coincidence that the genesis of Bitcoin is deeply-interconnected with the practical problem of spam filtration. Spam experimentally demonstrates anti-money. In this, it has been a great teacher. Any functional systemd message value credentials, negatively determined against spam, is already an embryonic digital currency.

§0.41 - The Bitcoin protocol is designed as a game. Incentives are built into its infrastructure. It only works when it is played. The distinctive feature of the Bitcoin game is that it produces binding decisions without a referee, or dependence upon prior agreement. Coordination is neither presumed, nor invoked, but produced. The absence of all superior authority makes Bitcoin transcendental in the philosophical sense, and adapts it to anarchy in the rigorous sense this term carries in the field of international relations theory. Any player is welcome to cheat. No moves that are possible are forbidden. Do your worst is its open invitation. This is what trustlessness means.

§0.4221 - There is necessarily a question, defining of the left in this domain, whether Bitcoin should be allowed at all. The ideologically basic issue is permission. At this level, the game is existential for Bitcoin, and everything it carries, meaning the occult liberal tradition. 20) Mere survival counts as a win. If permissionless process can establish itself, a great veto is irreversibly nullified. The political sphere is downsized.

§0.61 - ... To know is to capture, grasp, or seize. It is thus, at least roughly, to fight. Bitcoin, whose lineage is cryptographic, inherits better instincts - by far - in respect to knowledge, and truth than those typifying professional philosophy. It expects trouble, and not only difficulty. Its technical specifications are strategic, at the root. Rather than seeking shelter, Bitcoin makes cryptographic attack an intrinsic part of its security infrastructure. Its miners are poachers made game-keepers.

§0.82 - ... Nothing denominated in money can be realistically apprehended without recognition that the nature of money is undergoing the single most catastrophic revolution in its history, and is thus ceasing to support expectations that rely upon the simple tracking-forward of precedent.

§0.95 - Since it would probably sound absurd to say that Satoshi Nakamoto has triggered the single greatest thing to happen on this planet since the origin of life, we will not say it (unless cryptically).

§1.18 - ... It is unprecedented for the principal infrastructural innovation of a techonomic long-wave to take the immediate form of an investment vehicle. Extraordinary nonlinearity results.

§2.2 - Bitcoin is a machine. More specifically, it is a credibility machine. Its ideal operation coincides with the most rigorous realizable definition of truth. That is already to assert everything. In particular, it proposes that there are no (conceivably reachable) grounds of truth which offer leverage in respect to the Bitcoin protocol.

§2.81 The time of the blockchain is absolute, non-geometric, synthetic, and intensive. It produces a univocal order (sequence), and in the end does only this. Sequential ambivalence would make the double-spending problem intractable. Bitcoin teaches that a DSP solution cannot be less than absolute time. Bitcoin's engine of selection is priority, primacy, or ordinal privilege - being first in line, or first past the post. Bitcoin mining is a race.

§2.82 - The most modest plausible interpretation of Bitcoin is that its tacit perspective replaces (a lost) absolute time. A stronger proposal is that absolute time is, with the blockchain, inaugurated. ... Only in the blockchain does geometrically-irreducible arithmetic series find instantiation. Primordial time synthesis is henceforth something the technosphere knows how to do.

§2.83 - By the strictest conceivable (i.e. transcendental) principle, nothing beyond the blockchain has authority in relation to the blockchain, or could have. Were this not the case, a 'trusted third party', or organ of transcendent oversight, would remain operative, such that - reciprocally - the minimum conditions for the realization of Bitcoin would remain inaccessible. In other words, the Bitcoin protocol is transcendental because it is essentially beyond appeal. The idea of a superior tribunal is immanently nullified by it. Furthermore, not only is the Bitcoin blockchain transcendental, and thus unsurpassable, but also the model of the transcendental installed by the blockchain is itself unsurpassable. 'The buck stops here' in an ultimate definition. A certain 'end of philosophy' is thus reached. To argue otherwise is once again to propose an actual, or merely possible, court of appeal where there cannot, in principle, be one. There is nowhere to take a case against the blockchain and its statement of reality unless to a manifestly - i.e. effectively - inferior authority. All stubborn metaphysical commitments to the contrary case lack a realizable criterion, and can only regress to politics as a proxy. They might - and in fact will - be entertained, but no one will seriously bet upon them. Their enforcement requires escalating coercion, destined to reach levels that can only eventually prove impractical.

§3.3 - Grasped abstractly, the most powerful functional innovation of the Bitcoin protocol is the binding of currency issuance to the servicing of system integrity, which twists the process into a consistent circuit. It is this loop that enables the protocol to achieve autonomy, or - in a reflexive articulation - self-reliance. Because industrial incentives cover all regulatory requirements, self- reproduction is embedded within the process of bitcoin production. The protocol makes it impossible to produce bitcoins without automatically policing Bitcoin. Primary wealth extraction cannot take place without verifying transactions - through the validation of blocks - and thus tending the system as a whole, consistently and comprehensively (as if with an invisible hand). Stated succinctly, Bitcoin instantiates immanent economic government.

§3.432 - Would it not be preferable to have this "work' also (i.e. simultaneously) applied to a problem of intrinsic value?(123) In its most positive formulation, this question has been a stimulus to altcoin differentiation. Anything other that mining might do, beside sheer block validation, seems to indicate an unexploited seam of surplus value. Such suggestions are strictly analogous to a recommendation that gold prospecting be bound to valuable activities of some other kind (such as fossil hunting). On the basis of fundamental economic principle, they merit the most vigilant suspicion, since they amount to a deliberate confusion of cost calculations, promoted in the name of a superior - or at least supplementary - utility. Yet however much the costs of mining are strategically muddied - and in fact, in some complex fashion, cross-subsidized - they still need to be unmuddied, to exhibit an economically- intelligible commitment. Mining investment is a signal, which cannot be dissolved into extraneous purposes without destruction of critical information. ... The perfect pointlessness of bitcoin generation procedures - for anything other than Bitcoin system consolidation (as remunerated in bitcoins) - is a feature, and not a bug.

§4 - Humans are neither tigers, nor bees. Regardless of ethnic variation, or ideological faction, they are neither solitary, nor collective (eusociall139]), but social, and societies are essentially middling, or ambiguous. The concepts of the social and the individual, or the public and the private, are reciprocal, and mutually compromised. Social beings are necessarily (always, but only) partially coordinated, through transactional bonds. They have neither group mentality nor perfect autonomy. The way they get along together is an ineluctable and perennial problem, resolved through precarious, transient, meta- stable solutions. All promises of definitive fusion or fission, perfected solidarity or independence, are strictly utopian. The perpetual tension of dynamic social arrangements is an unsurpassable human reality.!140) It occupies the zone of coordination.

§4.05 - It bears repeating - or reiterating - because it cannot be easily over-emphasized, that Prisoners' Dilemma has extraordinarily general application to coordination problems. It would, indeed, be quite reasonable to characterize it as the model trust crisis. ... What Bitcoin acknowledges, from the beginning, is that to escape the prison-house of distrust is no easy thing, once mere moral exhortation in the direction of altruism is theoretically shelved. The recognition of this problem as a problem\_ is socio-political realism itself. It is at this fork in the road that almost everything is decided.

§4.08 - Bitcoin is a game, in the strong or technical sense, because it does not control cheating through a transcendent rule (upheld by a "trusted third party"), but rather through an immanent principle (Nakamoto Consensus). Its immediate ancestry, within the game-theoretic lineage, descends from the formulation of The Byzantine Generals' Problem, dating back to the mid-1970s:

> We imagine that several divisions of the Byzantine army are camped outside an enemy city, each division commanded by its own general. The generals can communicate with one another only by messenger. After observing the enemy, they must decide upon a common plan of action. However, some of the generals may be traitors, trying to prevent the loyal generals from reaching agreement.
>
> The generals must have an algorithm to guarantee that
>
> A. All loyal generals decide upon the same plan of action.
>
> The loyal generals will all do what the algorithm says they should, but the traitors may do anything they wish. The algorithm must guarantee condition A regardless of what the traitors do.
>
> The loyal generals should not only reach agreement, but should agree upon a reasonable plan. We therefore also want to insure that
>
> B. A small number of traitors cannot cause the loyal generals to adopt a bad plan.

§4.09 - 'Byzantine failures' arise when parties distributed within a communication network, containing unreliable nodes, are obstructed from reaching agreement, because they cannot confidently establish among themselves what has in fact been communicated, or from which agents messages have been received. A global perspective appears unobtainable, and local perspective is vulnerable to compromise. The extreme difficulty involved in Byzantine communications makes them a model coordination problem, of special relevance to Internet-connected agencies. ... None of the "generals' are able to stand outside the system, call upon an authoritative criterion from beyond it, or even direct their communications around it. ... Any solution has to be drawn from out of the system itself - which is to say, from the self-organizational resources inherent to sheer multiplicity.

§4.1 - Explicitly acknowledged 'network problems' long pre-exist the electronic era, by centuries, if not millennia. They constitute a guiding thread within what has been called 'the tradition of spontaneous order' I1481 Order is spontaneous if it solves a coordination problem without appeal to any organizational element at a higher - or super- social - level. Spontaneous order, social self-organization, or immanent social process, is thus counter-posed to transcendent social design (from above, or beyond)...

§4.11 - In the absence of superior guidance, solutions to coordination problems have to emerge, out of - and as games. This is only to say that cooperation between the agents involved cannot be presupposed, but has to arise from their interaction, if it is - indeed - to appear at all. To assume altruism or solidarity in such cases is a failure to think the problem at all. Coordination is the explanandum. The collectivist dogma is not an answer, therefore, but an alternative to the question. An answer is a trust machine, for which Bitcoin is the model.
